Chapter VI: M’Culloch, James Mill and Torrens. Anticipations of Marx’s Third Volume.
1. The three minor writers, McCulloch, James Mill, and, to a less degree, Torrens, were imitative expounders of the Ricardian political economy. While their views were not identical with those of Ricardo, they were accustomed to explain themselves by pointing out wherein they differed from the master. In this history they are of interest because each endeavored to state the labor-cost theory in a more arbitrary form than did Ricardo himself. This chapter could well be entitled, “The Labor Theory Running Riot.” McCulloch and Mill endeavored to reason out of existence the qualification Ricardo placed in the doctrine on account of interest, and Torrens thought he avoided the difficulty by stating that value is determined by cost in “accumulated labor.” An interesting fact in the literary history of the labor theory, and one which, to the best of my knowledge, has not hitherto been brought to light, is that McCulloch anticipated Karl Marx’s solution of the “organic composition of capital” problem. Marx closed his theory of value, in the first volume of Das Kapital, with the confession that, to all appearances, the facts of market values contradict the theory. He promised, however, to show, in a later volume, that in reality there is no contradiction.52 When the second volume appeared only to defer to the third the promised solution, “ a regular prize essay contest” sprang up in Germany, and endured for ten years, in which the participants endeavored to forecast what Marx’s solution would be. No one was successful.53 The answer to the enigma, as it appeared in the posthumous third volume of Das Kapital, is precisely the one McCulloch gave to the same question.

1. McCulloch.
2. We shall not retrace the general lines of Ricardo’s exposition as they reappear in McCulloch’s writings.54 In the course of the numerous editions of his Principles, and in his other observations upon value, this writer managed to commit nearly every conceivable blunder that could connect itself with the labor theory.55 From time to time, Ricardo mildly reproved his disciple for his rigidity:

“You go a little farther than I go in estimating the value of commodities by the quantity of labour required to produce them. You appear to admit of no exception or qualification whatever, whereas I am always willing to allow that some of the variations in the relative value of commodities may be referred to causes distinct from the quantity of labour necessary to produce them.”56

Albert C. Whitaker, History and Criticism of the Labor Theory of Value, 34

The cases of the value of standing timber, previous to the employment of labor upon it, or of the value of old wine, which Ricardo freely confessed were beyond his philosophy of value, had no terrors for McCulloch. In his abandonment to dogma, he solves the difficulty with ease by the following definition, one of the most crassly ridiculous originalities in the annals of political economy. It finds a place in this history to illustrate to what extremes the labor theory could be carried:

“Labour may properly be defined to be any sort of action or operation, whether performed by man, the lower animals, machinery, or natural agents, that tends to bring about any desirable result.”57

The distinction between the operations of men and those of machinery and natural agents is

“on the whole objectionable because it gives countenance to the idea that there is some radical difference between the labour of man and of machinery, etc., whereas, in so far as the doctrines and conclusions of political economy are concerned, they are in all respects the same.”58

Consider the example of a cask of wine, which is entirely finished as far as labor bestowed on it is concerned, and now possesses a certain exchange value. If let stand a few years it will be found to possess additional value. To force this case, McCulloch has decided to define whatever it be that “works” in the wine to be labor, and thus to affirm that the increased value is occasioned by the increased quantity of labor employed upon it. Malthus has made a rare criticism on this idea that cannot be omitted:

“There is nothing that may not be proved by a new definition. A composition of flour, milk, suet, and stones is a plum-pudding ; if by stones be meant plums. Upon this principle Mr. McCulloch undertakes to show that commodities do really exchange for each other according to the quantity of labour employed upon them: and it must be acknowledged that in the instance which he has chosen he has not been deterred by apparent difficulties.”59

Should we grant McCulloch’s definition of labor, the explanations which he bases upon it involve an uncommonly “vicious” circle. Having included in labor any of the operations of all “nature” which tend to produce a desirable result, he is forced to place aside desirable natural operations that are “gratuitous.”60 Having no way to measure natural operations by themselves, he decides, in effect, that whenever a commodity is found which possesses an exchange value in excess of that which would be proportionate to its cost in human labor, the thing to do is to add in enough labor of natural forces to restore the desired proportionality. Subsequently he adopted another line of reasoning, incompatible with this one, but his later method of establishing the absolute truth of the labor-cost theory was of the sam